howto/inference.md, before:

# Inference

We demonstrate how to run inference (next token prediction) with the LLaMA base model in the [`generate.py`](generate.py) script:

```bash
python generate.py --prompt "Hello, my name is"
```
Output:
```
Hello my name is TJ. I have a passion for the outdoors, love hiking and exploring. I also enjoy traveling and learning new things. I especially enjoy long walks, good conversation and a friendly smile.
```

The script assumes you have downloaded and converted the weights and saved them in the `./checkpoints` folder as described [here](download_weights.md).

> **Note**
> All scripts support argument [customization](customize_paths.md)

With the default settings, this will run the 7B model and require ~26 GB of GPU memory (A100 GPU).

## Run Lit-LLaMA on consumer devices

On GPUs with `bfloat16` support, the `generate.py` script will automatically convert the weights and consume about ~14 GB.
For GPUs with less memory, or ones that don't support `bfloat16`, enable quantization (`--quantize llm.int8`):

```bash
python generate.py --quantize llm.int8 --prompt "Hello, my name is"
```
This will consume about ~10 GB of GPU memory or ~8 GB if also using `bfloat16`.
See `python generate.py --help` for more options.

You can also use GPTQ-style int4 quantization, but this needs conversions of the weights first:

```bash
python quantize/gptq.py --output_path checkpoints/lit-llama/7B/llama-gptq.4bit.pt --dtype bfloat16 --quantize gptq.int4
```

GPTQ-style int4 quantization brings GPU usage down to about ~5GB. As only the weights of the Linear layers are quantized, it is useful to also use `--dtype bfloat16` even with the quantization enabled.

With the generated quantized checkpoint generation quantization then works as usual with `--quantize gptq.int4` and the newly generated checkpoint file:

```bash
python generate.py --quantize gptq.int4 --checkpoint_path checkpoints/lit-llama/7B/llama-gptq.4bit.pth
```

Commit message:

Update inference.md about dtype with gtpq

howto/inference.md, after:

# Inference

We demonstrate how to run inference (next token prediction) with the LLaMA base model in the [`generate.py`](generate.py) script:

```bash
python generate.py --prompt "Hello, my name is"
```
Output:
```
Hello my name is TJ. I have a passion for the outdoors, love hiking and exploring. I also enjoy traveling and learning new things. I especially enjoy long walks, good conversation and a friendly smile.
```

The script assumes you have downloaded and converted the weights and saved them in the `./checkpoints` folder as described [here](download_weights.md).

> **Note**
> All scripts support argument [customization](customize_paths.md)

With the default settings, this will run the 7B model and require ~26 GB of GPU memory (A100 GPU).

## Run Lit-LLaMA on consumer devices

On GPUs with `bfloat16` support, the `generate.py` script will automatically convert the weights and consume about ~14 GB.
For GPUs with less memory, or ones that don't support `bfloat16`, enable quantization (`--quantize llm.int8`):

```bash
python generate.py --quantize llm.int8 --prompt "Hello, my name is"
```
This will consume about ~10 GB of GPU memory or ~8 GB if also using `bfloat16`.
See `python generate.py --help` for more options.

You can also use GPTQ-style int4 quantization, but this needs conversions of the weights first:

```bash
python quantize/gptq.py --output_path checkpoints/lit-llama/7B/llama-gptq.4bit.pt --dtype bfloat16 --quantize gptq.int4
```

GPTQ-style int4 quantization brings GPU usage down to about ~5GB.
As only the weights of the Linear layers are quantized, it is useful to still use bfloat16 precision even with the quantization enabled. This is done automatically.

With the generated quantized checkpoint generation quantization then works as usual with `--quantize gptq.int4` and the newly generated checkpoint file:

```bash
python generate.py --quantize gptq.int4 --checkpoint_path checkpoints/lit-llama/7B/llama-gptq.4bit.pth
```
